so I'll be talking about the success of
my campus the University of Maryland
Baltimore County UMBC in educating
students of all types across the arts
and humanities and the science and
engineering areas what makes our story
especially important is that we have
learned so much from a group of students
who are typically not at the top of the
academic ladder students of color
students underrepresented in selected
areas and what makes the story
especially unique is that we have
learned how to help African American
students Latino students students from
low-income backgrounds to become some of
the best in the world in science and
engineering and so I begin with a story
about my childhood we all are products
of our childhood experiences it's hard
for me to believe that it's been 50
years since I had the experience of
being a ninth grade kid in Birmingham
Alabama a kid who loved getting A's a
kid who loved math who loved to read a
kid who would say to the teacher when
the teacher said here are ten problems
to the class this little fat kid would
say give us ten more and the whole class
would say shut up Freeman and that was a
designated kicker every day and so I was
always asking this question how could we
get more kids to really love to learn
and amazingly one week in in church when
I really didn't want to be there that
was in the back of the room being
placated by doing math problems I heard
this man say this if we can get the
children to participate in this peaceful
demonstration here in Birmingham we can
show America that even children know the
difference between right and wrong and
that children really do want to get the
best possible education and I looked up
and said who is that man and they said
his name was dr. Martin Luther King and
I said to my parents I've gotta go I
want to
I want to be a part of this and they
said absolutely not and we had a rough
go of it and at that time quite frankly
you really did not talk back to your
parents and somehow I said you know you
guys are hypocrites you make me go to
this you make me listen the man wants me
to go and now you say no and they
thought about it all night and they came
into my room the next morning they had
not slept they had been literally crying
and praying and thinking will we let our
twelve-year-old participate in this
March and probably have to go to jail
and they decided to do it and when they
came in to tell me I was at first elated
and then all of a sudden I began
thinking about the dogs and the fire
hoses and I got really scared I really
did and one of the points I make to
people all the time is that sometimes
when people do things that are
courageous it doesn't really mean that
their their courageous it simply means
that they believe it's important to do
it I wanted a better education I did not
want to have to have hand-me-down books
I wanted to know that the school I
attended not only had good teachers but
the resources we needed and as a result
of that experience in the middle of the
week while I was there in jail dr. King
came and said with our parents what you
children do this day will have an impact
on children who have not been born I
recently realized that 2/3 of Americans
today had not been born at the time of
1963 and so for them when they hear
about the Children's Crusade in
Birmingham in many ways if they see it
on TV it's like our looking at the 1863
Lincoln movie it's history and the real
question is what lessons that we learn
well amazingly the most important for me
was this that children can be empowered
to take ownership of their education
they can be taught to be passionate
about wanting to learn and to love the
idea of asking questions and so it is
especially significant that the
university I now lead the University of
Maryland Baltimore County UMBC was
founded the very year I went to jail
with dr. King in 1963 and what made that
institutional founding especially
important is that
Maryland is the south as you know and
quite frankly it was the first
University in our state founded at a
time when students of all races could go
there and so we had black and white
students and others who who began to
attend and it has been for 50 years an
experiment the experiment is this is it
possible to have institutions in our
country universities where people from
all backgrounds can come and learn and
learn to work together and learn to
become leaders and to support each other
in that experience now what is
especially important about that
experience for me is this we found that
we could do a lot in the arts and
humanities and social sciences and so we
we began to work on that years in the
60s and we produced a number of people
in law all the way to the humanities we
produce great artists Beckett is our
muse a lot of students who get into
theater it's great work the problem that
we faced was the same problem America
continues to face that students in the
sciences and engineering black students
were not succeeding but when I looked at
the data what I found was that quite
frankly students in general large
numbers were not making it and as a
result of that we decided to do
something too that would help first of
all the group at the bottom
african-american students and then
Hispanic students and Robert Meyerhoff
Robin and Jane Maha philanthropy said
we'd like to help
Robert Meyerhoff said why is it that
everything I see on TV about black boys
if it's not about basketball is not
positive I'd like to make a difference
to do something that's positive we
married those ideas and we created this
Meyerhoff Scholars Program and what is
significant about the program is that we
learned a number of things and the
question is this how is it that now we
lead the country in producing African
Americans who go on to complete PhDs in
science and engineering and MD PhDs
that's a big deal give me a hand for
that that's a big deal it's a big deal
you see most people don't realize that
it's not just minorities who don't do
well in science and engineering quite
frankly it you're talking about
Americans if you don't know it
while 20% of blacks and Hispanics who
begin with the major in science and
engineering will actually graduate in
science and engineering only 32% of
whites who begin with majors in those
areas actually succeed and graduate in
those areas and only 42% of
asian-americans and so the real question
is what is the challenge well a part of
it of course is K through 12 we need to
strengthen K through 12
but the other part has to do with the
culture of science and engineering on
our campuses whether you know it or not
large numbers of students with high SATs
and large numbers of AP credits who go
to the most prestigious universities in
our country begin in pre-med or pre
engineering and engineering and they end
up changing their majors and the number
one reason we find quite frankly is they
did not do well in first year science
courses in fact we call first year
science and engineering typically around
America weed out courses or barrier
courses how many of you in this audience
know somebody who started off in pre-med
or engineering and change their majors
within a year - it's an American
challenge half of you in the room I know
I know I know and what is interesting
about that is that so many students are
smart and can do it we need to find ways
of making it happen so what are the four
things we did to help minority students
that now are helping students in general
number one high expectations it takes an
understanding of the academic
preparation of students their grades the
rigor of the coursework their test
taking skills their attitude the fire in
the belly the passion for the work to
make it and so doing things they help
students prepare to be in that position
very important but equally important it
takes an understanding that it's hard
work that makes the difference I don't
care how smart you are I'll have some
what you think you are smart simply
means you're ready to learn you're
excited about learning and you want to
ask good questions you know I Robbie a
Nobel laureate said that when he was
growing up in New York all of his
friends parents would ask them what did
you learn in school at the end of a day
and and he said in contrast his Jewish
mother would say Izzy did you ask a good
question today and so high expectations
have to do with curiosity and
encouraging young people to be curious
and as a result of those high
expectations we began to find students
we wanted to work with the see what
could we do to help them not simply to
survive in science and engineering but
to become the very best to excel well
interestingly enough an example one
young man who earned a C in the first
course and wanted to go on to med school
we said we need to have you retake the
course because you need a strong
foundation if you're gonna move to the
next level every foundation makes the
difference in the next level he retook
the course that young man went on to
graduate from UMBC to become the first
black to get the MD PhD from the
University of Pennsylvania he now works
at Harvard nice story give me a hand for
that - all right secondly it's not about
test scores only Tesco's important
they're not the most important thing one
young woman had great grades the test
scores were not as high but she had a
factor that was very important she never
missed a day of school k12 that was
firing that belly that young woman went
on and she is today with an MD PhD from
Hopkins she's on the faculty in a
continued track in psychiatry PhD in
neuroscience
she and her adviser have a patent on a
second use of Viagra for diabetes
patients big hand for her big hands for
her and so high expectations very
important secondly the idea of building
community among the students you all
know that so often in science and
engineering we tend to think cutthroat
students are not taught to work in
groups and that's what we work to do
with that group to get them to
understand each other to build trust
among them to support each other to
learn how to ask good questions but also
to learn how to explain concepts with
clarity as you know it's one thing to
earn an a yourself it's another thing to
help someone else do well and so to feel
that sense of responsibility makes all
the difference in the world so building
community among those students very
important third the idea of it takes
researchers to produce researchers
whether you're talking about
artists producing artists or you're
talking about people getting into the
social sciences whatever the discipline
and especially in science and
engineering as in art for example you
need scientists to pull the students
into the work and so our students are
working in labs regularly and one a
great example that you look
during a snowstorm in Baltimore several
years ago the guy on our campus with
this Howard Hughes Medical Institutions
grant literally came back to work on in
his lab after several days and all these
students had refused to leave the lab
they had food they had packed out they
were in the lab working and they saw the
work not as schoolwork but as their
lives they knew they were working on an
AIDS research they were looking at this
amazing protein design and what was
interesting was each one of them focused
on that work and he said it doesn't get
any better than that and then finally if
you've got the community and you've got
the high expectations and you've got
researchers producing researchers you
have to have people who are willing as
faculty to get involved with those
students even in the classroom I'll
never forget a faculty member calling
the staff and saying I've got this young
man in class and black guy and it seems
like he's just not excited about the
work he's not taking notes we need to
talk to him what was significant was
that the faculty member was observing
every student to understand who was
really involved and who was not and was
saying let me see how I can work with
them let me get staff to help me out it
was that connecting that young man today
is actually a faculty member MD ph.d a
new engineering at Duke give them a big
hand for that and so the significance is
that we have now developed this model
that is helping us not only finally with
evaluation assessing what works and what
we learned was that we needed to think
about redesigning courses and so we've
redesigned chemistry we've redesigned
physics but now we are looking at
redesigning humanities and social
sciences because so many students are
bored in class
do you know that many students k12 and
universities don't want to just sit
there and listen to somebody talk they
need to be engaged and so we have done
if you look at on our website at the
chemistry Discovery Center you'll see
people coming from all over the country
to look at how we are redesigning
courses having an emphasis on
collaboration use of technology using
problems out of our biotech companies on
our campus and not giving students to
theories but having them struggle with
that those theories and it's working so
well that throughout our system of
University System of Maryland more and
more courses being redesigned called
academic innovation and what does all of
that mean it means that now not just in
science and
we now have programs in the arts in the
humanities in the Social Sciences in
teacher education even particularly for
women in IT if you don't know it there's
been a 79 percent decline in the number
of women majoring in computer science
just since 2000 and what I'm saying is
that the what will make the difference
will build building community among
students telling young women young
minority students and students in
general you can do this work and most
important giving them a chance to build
that community with faculty pulling them
into the work and are assessing what
works and what does not work most
important if a student has a sense of
self it is amazing how the dreams and
the values can make all the difference
in the world when I was a
twelve-year-old child in the jail in
Birmingham I kept thinking I wonder what
my future could be I had no idea that it
was possible for this little black boy
in Birmingham to one day be president of
a university that has students from 150
countries where students are not there
just to survive
where they love learning where they
enjoy being the best where they will one
day change the world Aristotle said
excellence is never an accident it is
the result of high intention sincere
effort and intelligent execution it
represents the wisest option among many
alternatives and then he said something
that gives me goosebumps
he said choice not chance determines
your destiny choice not chance
determines your destiny dreams and
values thank you all very much
[Applause]
[Music]